# Pewlett-Hackard-Analysis
## Technical Report
For this challenge, I was helping a fictional company--Pewlett Hackard (abbreviation: PH) prepare for a shift in its work force as a result of a wave of retiring works. The data I was given was in the inital format of CSV files. I used PostgreSQL to work with the information across data sets in order to come to valuable insights and conclusions. The first problem that I was looking to solve was to see who exactly was retiring from the company. The next question I was looking to solve was to see how many employees in each job type were retiring. Finally, the last step I performed was creating a table holding data on employees who are eligible for a potential mentorship program designed to train new managers at PH. My process for each step is described in the next paragraph.

The first part of the challenge that I solved was creating a list of employees retiring from PH in the near future. I had already created a list of retiring employees in the module, so for this table, all I had to do was add in each employee's title, hire date, and when they were being employed until by joining several tables. One problem I ran into when working with this data was that my table contained duplicate values for employees. This was a result of the dataset containing information for each employee listed for each title that they had held at the company. In order to solve this issue, I partitioned the data so as to only show the most recent employment position for each employee. The results are saved as retiring_employees_single_title.csv in the Challenge_Tables folder. 

The next step of this challenge that I solved was to find the number of employees retiring by each position. In order to perform this step, I counted each time that a title appeard in the "title" column, and then grouped the dataset by "title". This resulted in a table containing the number employees retiring by each title. The results are saved as 
retiring_employees_count.csv in the Challenge_Tables folder.

The final portion of this challenge involved creating a table containing the information on employees eligible for a management training program at PH. In order to perform this step, I joined the "employees" table with the "dept_emp" and "titles" table to list each employee's employee number, name, birth date, employement dates, and title. This information was filtered so as to only show employees who were born in the year 1965 and are currently at the company. Once again, I came upon duplicate values, so I had to partition the data so as to only have one row of information per employee. The results for this step are stored in the ment_elig_emp.csv file in the Challenge_Tables folder. 

The results of my analysis are as follows. In total, there are 33,118 employees of PH set to retire shortly. Senior Engineers are the group with the most number of soon-to-be retirees, with the number 13,651. The Senior Engineers category is followed closely by Senior Staff, with a count of 12,872 soon-to-be retirees. Managers were the group with the lowest soon-to-be retirees, with only 2 managers set to retire in the near future. This result is encouraging, as there will be plenty of managers in the mentorship program who should be able to take their place. This analysis is useful for preparing for the oncoming retirement wave, however there are a few more steps I would recommend in order to further prepare. First, I would recommend performing an analysis examining the number of employees retiring by department. This would allow management to see which departments will be most impacted, and will allow them to prepare accordingly. Second, I suggest examining the percentage of total employees retiring by position. This will give management a clearer picture of how large an impact the retirements will have on productivity. These two analyses will build off the previous work I have done, and will allow management to prepare accordingly for the employment shift. (Note: a picture of the schema is provided below to provide a guide for further analysis.)
